Species Classifier Deep Learning Model
A tool using neural network modeling for automated identification and classification of biological species from images. This repository houses the web application component of the project.

This project is a data science project that aims to develop a system to automatically identify insect specimens. This system would primarily help researchers studying biodiversity, behavior, and ecology of ants but also provide means to support amateur entomologists in the field as well as to generalize to other insect species. The project consists in the development of a system composed by: 1) a deep learning image classification model, 2) a back-end software running on a server to automatically classify pictures of insect specimens using the model, and both 3) a web-based interface and 4) an app-based interface to upload pictures and visualize classification results.

The biological classification system and identification of animal and plant taxa are necessary for any research project involving living organisms. Unfortunately, the task of identification of many species or higher taxa (such as genera or families) requires considerable expertise developed over years of taxonomic research. This is especially true for hyper-diverse groups of organisms, such as insects. The shrinking number of active insect taxonomists and their limited time resources leave many biologists to try and identify their samples on their own, instead of consulting experts. This is usually done using so-called dichotomous keys, which are often cumbersome and challenging to use for non-experts. As a result, the correct identification of study organisms is often difficult. An alternative approach, only recently available due to large amount of digitized biodiversity data and developments in neural network model applications, is using deep learning for automated classification of images of animals and plants. Well-performing tools for automated identification of biological species from images will constitute a significant development in life sciences and allow more effective conservation efforts. This system will be useful for documenting and digitizing natural history specimens from museum collections around the world and will help foster citizen science by empowering amateur naturalists to identify insects in the field.